The goal of this study is to explore how avian community structure varies along the rural-to-urban gradient. We expect that species richness will decline with increasing urban land cover and that this decline will be driven by the life history traits of the associated species, due to limited opportunities for habitat specialists and members of certain feeding and nesting guilds. To address this, we use reduncancy analysis to evaluate the degree to which urban land cover explains avian community composition and assess how the following varies across the rural-to-urban gradient: 1) Species richness and relative richness of trophic and nesting guilds; 2) Total abundance and relative abundances of trophic and nesting guilds across the rural-to-urban gradient; 3) Community niche breadth.

METHODS

Avian data were collected as a part of the Neighborhood Nestwatch Program, a citizen science project run by the Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center. Nestwatch has established a network of sampling sites within the Greater Washington D.C. metropolitan area with sampling predominantly located at the homes of project participants. Sites in this study range from rural open and forested areas, to suburban and urban environments. In order to more accurately characterize the rural-to-urban gradient supplemental survey data were collected from 30 sites from forested and core urban (> 50% impervious surface) habitats, which were under-represented within Nestwatch. Combined, these sites are representative of the rural-to-urban gradient within our study region (see Evans et al. 2015, Appendix A).Between the years of 2009 and 2012, technicians visited sites once annually (May-August) and conducted a ten minute, fixed radius point count (50 m). The distances between the observer and individual birds were estimated in 10m distance segments (e.g., 0-10m). Flyovers were not recorded as they may not be representative of birds with established territories within the point count radius. Likewise, count data restricted to species with known breeding ranges within our study region.

We evaluated observed species dietary, foraging, and nesting niches, as well as each species’ range size and the variation in habitats in which it has been observed.  Dietary and foraging niche data were obtained from an avian trait database compiled by Wilman et al. (2014). Nest data, including nest substrate and nest height were obtained from Birds of North America (Poole et al. 2014). For each of these life history traits we calculated the degree of variation in the trait (e.g., the range of observed nest heights for a species), and computed the percentile rank of variation for each species in the dataset, with zero representing a narrow niche and one representing a wide niche relative to other observed species. We also evaluated the range size of a species and the diversity in habitats in which a species occurs. These data were obtained from a previous study (Hurlbert and White 2007) on species occurrence across Breeding Bird survey sampling routes and were converted to percentile ranks as above (see Table One).

Count data were used to obtain site-level species richness and abundance estimates. We estimated site-level species richness, as well as within-guild richness using Chao's richness estimator (1984). To estimate abundance, we adjusted count data for detectability using the R Package unmarked (Fiske and Chandler 2015). We used the generalized distance sampling model of Chandler (2011) to fit yearly and site covariates to adjust abundance estimates by detectability. As birds in open habitats are more readily observed, we calculated the proportional canopy cover within 50m of the point count location and used this value as a continuous covariate for detection (Fry et al. 2011). Because bird activity varies considerably at different times of day and at different stages in the breeding cycle, we included the Julian day of the point count and the time of day as annual covariates for detectability. Likewise, as bird activity may vary under weather conditions, temperature was used as an annual detectability covariate. Finally, because point counts were conducted by multiple technicians of varying skill levels, the observer was used as a group covariate for detection (Ralph et al. 1995).

We used the proportion of impervious surface to characterize the degree of urbanization of each site. This proxy variable has been found to be most predictive of avian demographic response to urbanization (see Ryder et al. 2010) and adequately reflect the variation in habitat distribution and quality across the rural-to-urban gradient (reviewed in McKinney 2002). Across our samples, impervious surface was highly predictive of core urban and suburban land cover types with sites at the rural end of the urbanization gradient predominantly comprised of agricultural or forested habitats (see Evans et. al 2015, Appendix A). We used the _raster_ package in R (Hijmans 2014) to calculate the proportion of impervious surface (30 m resolution, Fry et al. 2011) within a 100 m neighborhood of each sampling location. This scale was chosen because it is incorporates the breeding territory size of birds that intersect the 50m point count radius. Because avian response to urbanization is likely nonlinear, we included both linear (IMP) and quadratic (IMP2) impervious terms as predictor for all analyses (see Evans et al. 2015). 

We used a linear model framework mixed model framework in the R Package _lme4_ (Bates et al. 2014) to evaluate richness patterns and generalized linear models to assess patterns of abundance across the rural-to-urban gradient. Because count data may vary annually and based on observer skill, these variables were included as random effects within richness models. Akaike's Information Criteria (AIC) was used to select the most supported model within a candidate set of models that included a null of no land cover effect and models that included linear and quadratic impervious surface terms (Burnham and Anderson 1998). To evaluate the proportional richness and abundance of dietary, feeding, nesting guilds, as well as migratory status (i.e., resident, short-distance, and neotropical migrants) we used beta regression (Ferrari and Cribari-Neto 2004) with a logit-link function in the R Package _betareg_ (Cribari-Neto and Zeileis 2010). Because proportional data may include zero and one boundaries, proportional values were scaled following following Smithson and Verkuilen (2006).

We used redundancy analysis (RDA) to assess the composition of communities, in species and life history guild space, across the rural-to-urban gradient using the R Package _Vegan_ (Oksanen et al. 2014). To assess the influence of urbanization on community composition, we evaluated the portion of the variance explained by impervious surface across sites (see Legendre and Legendre 2012). To test the influence of impervious surface on community composition we used a permutation-based analysis of variance of species or niche and impervious surface dissimilarity matrices  (Anderson 2001).

To assess community-level variation in niche breadth, we adapted the Index of Waterbird Community Integrity developed by Deluca et al. (2004, 2008). For each species, we calculated the average niche breadths with values ranging from zero for niche specialists and one for niche generalists. We then calculated an abundance weighted average for the bird community at each site as: INSERT EQUATION HERE

PROVIDE EXPLANATION OF THE FORMULA ABOBVE HERE. We then evaluated the abundance-scaled community niche breadths across the rural-to-urban gradient using a generalized linear model approach with impervious surface and a quadratic term for impervious surface as our predictor variables. 




